---
title: Input / Output
---

# Input / Output

Julia features a variety of packages facilitating input and output of data. For C++, XDiag provides convenient functionality for TOML and HDF5 files.

## Reading from TOML

While XDiag allows for defining a Hamiltonian or other operators in code, it is often preferable to define objects in advance in an input file. In XDiag, we use the TOML language to define basic objects in simple files. Among those, operators represented as an [OpSum](../documentation/operators/opsum.md) can be specified in a simple format. As an example, the Hamiltonian of the $N=8$ site Heisenberg chain we created above can be defined in the following way.

=== "TOML"
	```toml
	--8<-- "examples/user_guide/spinhalf_chain.toml:ops"
	```

The first entry in every list element denotes the coupling constant $J$, the second entry denotes the type [SdotS](../documentation/operators/operator_types.md), and the following two entries are the sites of the operator. To read in such a Hamiltonian from a TOML file we can use the [FileToml](../documentation/io/file_toml.md) object together with the [read_opsum](../documentation/io/read_opsum.md) function,

=== "Julia"
	```julia
	--8<-- "examples/user_guide/main.jl:usage_guide_io1"
	```
=== "C++"
	```c++
	--8<-- "examples/user_guide/main.cpp:usage_guide_io1"
	```

In the TOML file, the coupling constant $J$ is defined as a string, which is then set to a numerical value in the application code. Alternatively, the coupling constant could also be explicitly defined by a numerical value in the TOML file. Complex numbers $x + iy$ can be represented by a size-two array of the form `[x, y]`. XDiag also features the functions [read_permutation_group](../documentation/io/read_permutation_group.md) and [read_representation](../documentation/io/read_representation.md) to conveniently read [PermutationGroup](../documentation/symmetries/permutation_group.md) and [Representation](../documentation/symmetries/representation.md) objects used to describe symmetries from file; see [Symmetries](11-symmetries.md).

The TOML input files assume that counting starts at $0$ for both the C++ and Julia version, such that the same input file can be used for both languages. In Julia, however, the site index is increased by one after reading in the [OpSum](../documentation/operators/opsum.md).

## Writing results to HDF5

The results of numerical simulations are typically stored in output files. A standard scientific data format is the [HDF5 format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_Data_Format). Julia supports input and output to HDF5 with the [HDF5.jl](https://juliaio.github.io/HDF5.jl/stable/) package. For C++ we provide a convenient way of writing results to HDF5 files. In general all numerical data, including scalar real/complex numbers as well as Armadillo vectors and matrices, can be easily written to files using the [FileH5](../documentation/io/file_h5.md) object.

=== "C++"
	```c++
	--8<-- "examples/user_guide/main.cpp:usage_guide_io2"
	```

The second argument `"w!"` specifies the access mode to the file. `"w!"` is the forced write mode, where preexisting files are overwritten. Additionally, a protected write mode `"w"` raising an error for existing files, and a read mode `"r"` are provided.
